# CS360-Mobile-Architect-and-Programming

<h2>Journal</h2> 

The requirements of the inventory app I created were to build a database with two tables, one for user login credentials and another for inventory items, create a screen for logging into the app that would also serve to register new users, create a screen to display inventory items in a grid, and to develop mechanisms that allow the quantity of inventory items to be increased or decreased. Additionally, the mobile app was required to have a mechanism that would notify a user when the quantity of an inventory item has been reduced to zero. The app’s overarching purpose is to track the inventory of items in a warehouse and provide an accurate count of each item. The goal is for it to be a simple, mobile inventory solution that will facilitate organization, productivity, and data visibility. The user needs this app was designed to address were an intuitive and simple design that enables users to access information on the fly and present data in a way such that it is easily accessible and comprehendible. <br><br>
The screens I developed that were necessary to support user needs and produce a user-centered UI for the app were a login screen, a registration screen, an inventory screen, an add new item screen, and an item overview screen. I also incorporated features into these screens to support user needs and produce a user-centered UI. The login screen allows users to access the registration screen if they a new to the app. The registration screen requires users to enter their username, password, and, optionally, their phone number. The logic in my code will ensure that the username is unique. User can also access the login screen from the registration screen should they need to navigate back. The inventory screen uses a recycler view to organize inventory items in a grid. There is an icon button in the top app bar that will trigger a device to request permission to send SMS when clicked. This feature is used to notify users when the quantity of an item is low. A floating action button allows users to add new items on the inventory screen. The add new item and item overview screens are very similar to one another. They both utilize icon buttons that can increase or decrease an item’s quantity, remove an item from the inventory, and add or update an item. My UI design keeps users in mind by having distinct navigation elements that allows them to easily accomplish their goals and using icons to articulate functionality. Icon buttons helped make my designs successful because I used familiar icons that effectively communicate what action they provide when triggered. They supports user needs because actions and motions become more intuitive which allows users to use the app efficiently and promotes adoption and engagement.<br><br>
I used an analytical and disciplined approach to the process of coding my app. I performed requirements gathering and analysis before designing wireframes. I waited to receive feedback from my wireframes to begin coding. Consistent and incremental testing is a strategy that I used to ensure that my code executed properly and to remove bugs. I also performed extensive research to resolve issues that arose and develop my code to align with best practices. These strategies can be easily applied in the future and I can continue to improve on my testing abilities along the way. Testing in Android Studio was time-consuming and I hope to learn how to test more efficiently as I progress.<br><br>
I tested my code to ensure that it was functional by using an emulated device and examining my app’s behavior after I made changes to code or added new elements. I could easily say that half of the time spent on this project was related to testing. I also tested my app by using output statements and logging. Logging is a specific technique that I would like to further develop. The process of testing is important because it tells us if our code works as expected or not. Testing often is important because an error in code is more easily corrected the sooner it is found. Otherwise you may spend more time than necessary trying to find a bug. <br><br>
In considering the full app design and development process, from initial planning to finalization, there were a couple of areas where I needed to innovate to overcome a challenge. I initially designed the app to have the notification icon button underneath the top app bar. However, it placement in between the top app bar and grid headers was not visually appealing nor an efficient use of space. I researched how to place an icon button inside the top app bar on a single fragment and was able to successfully implement it. I also made it so that the icon changes depending on whether or not SMS is enabled. Another challenge I overcame was implanting the functionality to notify a user when an item’s quantity reaches zero. My initial code sent an SMS for low stock items every time a user navigated back to the inventory screen. This was overkill and not effective. I changed my code to use a Boolean value that allowed an SMS to be sent only one time from the inventory screen. I also added triggers within the add new item screen and item overview. A new item added to the inventory with a quantity of zero will trigger an SMS to be sent and an existing item that is updated with a quantity of zero will also trigger an SMS.<br><br>
The specific component from my mobile app that I was particularly successful in demonstrating knowledge and skill is navigation. I used a navigation graph to visualize and establish the logical connections and actions within my app. Learning about and implementing app navigation allowed me to follow Android’s principles of navigation to create a consistent and intuitive user experience. I learned how to apply an up button that was useful in allowing users to navigate back to the inventory screen from the add new item and item overview screens. I feel that the navigation component is one of the most important components in app development because users will not engage with an app they cannot navigate easily or intuitively.      
